klingon-assistant-data
======================

Klingon language data files for **boQwI'** and associated apps.

The `notes` fields are for typical users of the lexicon. An attempt should be
made to keep information there "in-universe". The `hidden_notes` field is for
(typically) "out-of-universe" information such as puns (what Marc Okrand calls
"coincidences"), or background stories about how a word or phrase was invented
(such as having to retrofit a movie edit).

The `entry_name` field should exactly match how the definition appears in the
original source if possible. This is important as the database is used by
software which may compare its entries to other lexicons. In particular, KWOTD
(Klingon Word Of The Day) functionality in {boQwI'} partially depends on
matching the `entry_name` to the word or phase received from the {Hol 'ampaS}
server. A mismatch may result in failure to retrieve the KWOTD.

If a definition appears multiple times in the same source, the broadest
definition should be used. For example, {tu':v} appears as "discover, find,
observe, notice" in TKD in the K-E side, but also as just "find, observe" in
the body text, as well as separately under each of those four words in the E-K
side. The K-E definition should be used in this case. Contradictions (e.g.,
differences between K-E and E-K definitions) and errors should be noted in
`hidden_notes`.

If an entry is defined differently in different sources, the definitions should
be reconciled, and the reconciliation noted under `hidden_notes` or `notes` as
appropriate. Sometimes, it may be appropriate to split a word into multiple
entries. For example, {meS:v} has separate entries for "tie a knot" and
"encrypt", even though the latter meaning is obviously derived from the former.
There is some discretion in whether an entry should be split up or not.

Translations of the `definition` field can take liberties as necessary to
convey the meaning. For example, it may be the case that disambiguating text in
brackets in the original English definition is not necessary in another
language, or conversely, that disambiguating text needs to be added. Words
which are in brackets or quotes may need to be added as `search_tags` (in the
corresponding language as appropriate) if they are likely to be searched. (A
quirk of the database system means that words in the `definition` fields which
are enclosed in brackets or quotes are not tokenised as search terms
automatically.)

The `notes` fields in languages other than English should be direct
translations if possible, but may differ if it is necessary to include
information specific to a language. For example, the German entry for
{ngech:n:2} notes a common misunderstanding specific to the German language.

When adding a new entry, the `blank.xml` template should be used. There is a
script `call_google_translate.py` which may be used to automatically translate
the `definition` and `notes` fields. An attempt will be made to use Google
Translate to translate any non-English `definition` or `notes` field which
contain only the content "TRANSLATE". (The non-English `definition` fields are
already filled in with "TRANSLATE" in the template.) After calling the
translation script, it may be necessary to do some postprocessing. Instructions
are found in the comments to the script file.

It is a convention to link only once to another entry within each entry.
Subsequent references to another entry should be tagged with `nolink`. If there
is already a link to another entry in `notes`, then the target entry should not
typically appear again in `see_also`.

Commits containing manual translations should change only one language (though
occasionally it may make sense to translate one or a few entries into multiple
languages, such as after a large vocabulary reveal at an event such as the KLI
{qep'a'} or Saarbr√ºcken {qepHom'a'}). Commits created using the
`commit_submissions.py` script are exempt from this rule, but must be manually
reviewed.

There is a script `review_changes.sh` which takes in a language code and an
optional commit (which defaults to `upstream/master` if omitted). This should
be used by translators to check translations before a pull request is made.

After changes to the database, it is important to run the `write_db.sh` script
(in the [Android](https://github.com/De7vID/klingon-assistant-android) repo) to
ensure that the database still compiles. Running this script also updates the
`EXTRA` file (which marks where the "extra" section of the database begins).
Optionally, one may also run the `check_audio_files.pl` script (in the
`scripts` directory of the [main](https://github.com/De7vID/klingon-assistant)
repo) to see if any syllables have been added which are not available in the
[TTS](https://github.com/De7vID/klingon-assistant-tts-android).

Conventions for German translators

All adjectivally used verbs should be translated as "[quality] sein", not just 
the quality as an adjective.

Any suggestions and recommendations ("for x, use y") should be written in a 
neutral form ("for x, y is used"). The autotranslated sentences use the very 
formal "Sie" which looks too formal for this app. To avoid discussions about 
using the informal "du", such phrases can be rearranged into general statements 
like "dieses Wort wird verwendet" ("this word is used").
